# Poem Quality Evaluation
## Main idea
The system takes a poem and evaluates it by several parameters: rhythm, novelty, repetition, meaningfulness, emotionality, grammar. The project consists of several scripts: the first one counts repetition and novelty (Counting novelty is only possible if a poem is a part of a corpus. The script counts novelty of the poem compared to other poems in the corpus), the second one counts rythm and the last one is a model that is trained on Bert to classify the poem based on three labels: meaningfulness, emotionality, grammar.

## Process
+ Collecting the dataset (real poems + generated poems)
  + Parsed 1800+ poems from [rustih.ru](https://rustih.ru/) and [tipoet.com](https://tipoet.com/);
  + Generated 170+ poems via different [sources](https://github.com/polinadumbledore/poem_quality_evaluation/blob/main/poems_generation/generation_sources.txt);
+ Automatic labeling
  + Looked through variants of labeling algorithms, chose the best practices;
  + Adapted the scripts to our needs;
+ Manual labeling
  + Thought through labeling rules;
  + Did test-labeling, discussed the results;
  + Labeled the whole corpora;
  + Checked quality of the labeling;
  + Resolved conflicts;
+ Training the model
  + Tested several different models and chose the best one;
  + Performed expirements on the results;
+ Evaluating different poem generators.

## Parameters
+ **Rhythm**: We calculate length of each line, count number of unique line lengths and divide it by number of lines (automatically [rhythm](https://github.com/polinadumbledore/poem_quality_evaluation/blob/main/rhythm.ipynb))
+ **Novelty**: N-gramms of a poem are compared to n-gramms of other poems to evaluate poem's uniqueness, originality (automatically [novelty & repetition](https://github.com/polinadumbledore/poem_quality_evaluation/blob/main/novelty_and_repetition.ipynb))
+ **Repetition**: N-gramms of a poem are compared to each other within the poem to check if there is variation between lines (automatically [novelty & repetition](https://github.com/polinadumbledore/poem_quality_evaluation/blob/main/novelty_and_repetition.ipynb))
+ **Meaningfulness**: 1 - more than half of a poem makes sense, 0 - less than half of a poem makes sense
+ **Emotionality**: 1 - emotional, 0 - not emotional
+ **Grammaticality**: 1 - everything is correct, 0 - there is at least one mistake
### Algorithm for manual labeling:
The corpora is divided into two halves. Each half is labeled by two people independetnly and the results are compared. Before resolving conflcits we measured Cronbach's alpha:
- Cronbach's alpha for the first pair of labellers == 0.9307134059623864
- Cronbach's alpha for the second pair of labellers == 0.9966737810000899

After that we took the minor option, if there labellers scored a poem differently, though mostly we managed to be quite cohesive.

## Training the model

We trained several different model to decide which performed the best. Parameters for the training: learning rate of 2e-5, 2 epochs consisting of 9 batches, weight_decay of 0.01. The threshold for the classes was 0.5

| model | F1 score | Accuracy |
|------------|-------------|-------------|
| [rubert-base-cased with lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/DeepPavlov/rubert-base-cased) | 0.79 | 0.68 |
| [rubert-base-cased without lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/DeepPavlov/rubert-base-cased) | 0.8 | 0.69 |
| [xlm-roberta-base with lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base) | 0.8 | 0.67 |
| [xlm-roberta-base without lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base) | 0.8 | 0.67 |
| [rubert-tiny with lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/cointegrated/rubert-tiny2) | 0.8 | 0.68 |
| [rubert-tiny without lemmatization](https://huggingface.co/cointegrated/rubert-tiny2) | 0.8 | 0.67 |

In this table, we rounded the numbers. In reality, there is a small difference between, for example, rubert-tiny with and without lemmatization nd so on. In the end, we chose rubert-base-cased from DeepPavlov without lemmatization as it performed slightly better. 

After consideration, we tested the threshold of the best model to see which is better. 

| threshold | F1 score | Accuracy |
|------------|-------------|-------------|
| 0.5 | 0.8 | 0.69 |
| 0.6 | 0.79 | 0.7 |
| 0.7 | 0.69 | 0.62 |

We settled on the threshold of 0.6. 

We also wanted to see which class prediction had the best accuracy (in other words: which is easier to predict: meaningfulness, grammar or emotionality?)

| class | F1 score | Accuracy |
|------------|-------------|-------------|
| meaningfulness | 0.75 | 0.65 |
| grammar | 0.81 | 0.73 |
| emotionality | 0.661 | 0.59 |

As we expected, grammar was the easiest class to predict. On the contrary, emotionality has the lowest accuracy and F1 score. 

## Evaluating different poem generators
Having prepared our model we evaluated different generative models. To calculate a model's score we took 30 poems generated by it, evaluated those, counted mean value for each parameter and finally counted mean value of all the parameters:

| model      | score       |
|------------|-------------|
| maxtext    | 1.714286    |
| gigachat   | 2.000000    |
| gpt-3.5    | 2.285714    |

## References
[1] *Manex Agirrezabal, Hugo Gonçalo Oliveira, Aitor Ormazabal.* Erato: Automatizing Poetry Evaluation. (2023)
